I have great pleasure to introduce our first speaker today. He is my colleague, a good
friend of mine, and so without further ado, I'd like us all to join me in welcoming Alex
Gold.
Hey, everybody. Like Kelly said, my name is Alex. I'm here to talk today about end-to-end
data science deployment with R Markdown, Shiny, Plumber, and Pins. The slides and code
are available online at rstudio.io. Although as I'm saying this, I'm realizing that the
slides are not there yet, but they will be. So look forward to that.
So this story starts, as all great stories do, with a Shiny app. And this Shiny app in
particular uses the Capital Bike Share data. So if you don't know what the Capital Bike
Share is, it's the system of docked bicycles in Washington, D.C. That's what they look
like. That's what the docks look like. You can rent a bike from a dock and ride it to
a different dock and dock it there. And so, you know, what I'm going to try and do with
this Shiny app is predict the number of bikes at different stations at different times.
So where's my window? Here's my window. So this is what the app looks like. I've got
a map of Washington, D.C. I can click on a particular station. You'll see this is at
21st and M. And if I scroll down, now I can see the number of bikes that are available
at that station or predicted to be available at that station in the next 24 hours. Important
maybe if I wanted to go get a bike in D.C. at 8 p.m. tonight because there are going
to be none at 21st and M. Too bad. So let's talk a little bit about sort of how
this app works. So the Capital Bike Share organization makes available an API that provides
real-time bike data. How many bikes are at each station right now available on the API.
And I'm going to import this using an R Markdown document. From there, I'm going to build an
XGBoost model to do all my prediction for me. I'm going to do that also in R Markdown.
I'm going to serve this model with a Plumber API. And if you're interested in Plumber,
I'm not going to talk a lot more about it right now, but hang out because, like, the
rest of this track is going to be a lot of Plumber. So that will be awesome. And then,
of course, I'm serving this to the client app at the end. And so I had this app, but
I wanted to take it further. It just lives on my machine. I don't want to have to, like,
walk my computer to people to show them my app. And so I knew where I wanted to get to
was, you know, my shiny app is available all the time to whoever wants it. The model gets
retrained every day, right? Like weather's going to change, different seasons. I want
to be able to have, you know, the model retraining periodically. And I need to do this data import
every 20 minutes. It's realtime data. So once it's gone, it's gone. And so I want to
get those realtime data, pull them in, and store them somewhere so I can do my predictions
as a time series or panel kind of thing. So I'm there. But that leads to a whole bunch
of questions. What should I prioritize while I'm doing this? There are all these things
that I could want to do as I'm trying to, like, you know, sort of deploy this app and,
you know, add some horsepower. And these are, like, hard, scary, big questions. And
really what they boil down to is, you know, is my deployment sophisticated enough? Am
I doing it for real or not? Of course, I then, you know, did what I sometimes do when I'm
procrastinating, which was I started watching Star Wars, just because, you know, why not
do that? And you all might know this guy. Green, big ears, talks funny. He's the Jedi
Master Yoda, of course. And he says this line in the middle of one of the movies, size
matters not. Look at me. Judge me by my size, do you? And I thought this was really appropriate.
If you just sub in the word, like, sophistication here, this is a great way to think of why
do we care about deploying Shiny apps? And, of course, we care because we want to increase
value. We want to provide value. Sophistication is irrelevant, right? Are you providing value
is the right question. And so how do we deploy to increase value? How was I going to do that?
And so there were sort of three principles that I took as my guides. And the first one
was that I wanted to make my content accessible. And what that meant is that people who should
have access to the content can get it when they need it and somewhere that they know
where to find it. The second thing was reproducible, right? Can I reliably understand how the content
exists, why it is the way it is? Can I sort of audit it? And then secure. And that's sort
of the inverse of accessible, right? Should people who don't people who shouldn't have
access don't have access? That's pretty important. So, you know, the question is how do I get
there? And this is honestly not a trivial problem, right? In particular, in between
those important train steps with my data, I have to store that data somewhere. And then
in between training and serving the model, I have to store that model somewhere. And
until recently, this wasn't a solved problem. You know, I could put the analysis data in
a database. If I have one handy, if I have right privileges to one, that's fine. But
if I don't or if I don't want to put it in a database for some reason, there kind of
was no good answer there. And similarly with modeling. There was kind of no good answer.
So I went back to Star Wars. Went back to, you know, not working on this. Because that
was easier. And of course Yoda came to my rescue yet again. Saying, you know, when hopeless
the task seems, come out with a sweet new R package. Someone will. It's inevitable.
You know? And of course that was true. The pins package is a new package by Javier Larrache.
This is a super cool package. I'm super excited about it. Basically what it lets you do is
take something, an R object, put it somewhere else, and then get it back when you want it.
This is sort of the essence of the pins package. But let's go into a little more detail about
exactly how it works. So I'm going to start off with my R, my RStudio session, and I
have an object I want to save. You can think like a data frame. It could also be a model.
It could be any sort of S3 compliant object. And I have a board also. And my board is where
I'm going to save it. Pins currently supports a bunch of different boards. So RStudio Connect,
Kaggle, GitHub, Azure, Google Cloud Platform, S3, or a website. Javier is constantly adding
new boards I will also add. So if you want something that isn't here, put it on GitHub
and it will probably have it done before the end of conf. It's kind of incredible.
But that aside, it supports a lot of different places that you can put your data. Great.
So it's really easy to use as well. You put your data onto the board with the pins pin
command and get it back with the pins pin get command. So let me show you how this works
just to be a little more concrete here. So the way this works is that I've got my pins
pins. Let me make this bigger for y'all. Better. It's probably easier to see, right?
So I'm going to load up the pins package. I'm going to register my board. In this case,
I'm registering RStudio Connect. And this just means, you know, this is a board you
can talk to. To the R session. So it's going to register. Takes just a moment. And then
I'm going to pin my data to the board, right? It's pin whatever the object is I'm pinning,
the name of the object and the board where it's going. And it's going. Taking a moment
to load. And so here I am in the connections pane. And you can see that like any other
type of connection, like a database connection, it loads up right here. And if what I pinned
is a data frame, I can actually see what's going on there. I can see the different fields
in my data frame. And I can also go over here. I can preview the table. I can see the first
1,000 rows. This is MT cars. They're only 32. But, you know, you can see up to 1,000.
And then if I want to get the pin back, I just run this pin get command, saving it to
a local file. And now I've got MT cars back. To me, this is so cool. Because what's happened
now is instead of having to email around data or having to save data somewhere and tell
everybody where it is and version 2 final, actually final, Alex final, none of that.
The person needs to know the name of the board or the URL of the board. And they need to
know what the name of the pin is. And then what they get when they do a pin get is always
the newest version. This is the thing that's really exciting. The newest version is always
available on this pin. So the question is sort of, you know, what
are good things to pin and what are bad things? Obviously you don't want to store every single
R object you've ever used in a pin. So again, wisdom from Yoda. Just before Luke goes off
to fight Vader at Cloud City. Before that, Yoda gives him some very sage advice. Best
considered a caching mechanism, pins are. And what this means, A, it's kind of, you
know, this movie came out in 1980 and this package came out in 2020. So this is very
impressive to begin with. But even more impressive that he's right. And so, you know, you generally
don't want to save your data of record in a pin. It's not a database. It doesn't have
all the like bells and whistles of a database, being able to audit. Not a database for placement.
What pins are great for is they're great for something that you could compute at the time
or you could get at the time, but it's easier to store it somewhere. You'd rather cache
it rather than recreating it on demand. So there are three attributes that good candidates
for a pin have. They're relatively small, say like a gigabyte. There's no hard rule,
but a gigabyte is a good rule of thumb. They're reused that you actually want this thing over
and over and over again in different pieces of your content. And that they're current.
You want the tip of the pin. You only care about the newest version. If you care about
archival versions, a pin is not a great choice. But if you care about just the newest one,
that's really good. And again, pins are for things you can recreate. It's not for your
data of record. That's not a great choice. I mean, if you do it, whatever. I'm not going
to stop you. But officially recommending against that.
So let me show you, let's go back to our bike app here. And just show a little bit of where
pins show up in this app. We're very zoomed in. And so here we have the app, right? Rinder,
this is what our app looks like. We've got a map. We click on the map. We get the prediction
of the number of bikes at different stations throughout. And so there are a couple places
that pins show up here. And I'm going to be very honest, this app is quite, the code that
goes in here is quite large. It demos a lot of different things. So I'm going to go real
quick through a couple little things here and ignore a lot of the rest of the code.
So that's just how it's going to go. Sorry. And so when I go to my pins here, I have my
ingest and tidy part here. This is where I'm pulling in from the API. So I'm registering
with both my database connection, right? That's this line 15. And in line 16 and 17,
I'm registering the pins board. Because I'm going to put things in both places. So first
what I'm going to do is pull down from the API the number of bikes. Oh, interesting.
Maybe I should run this line first. There we go. And so what I'm going to do is I'm
going to pull down the number of bikes. And you can see this is just a data frame that
came back. All this code in here is just sort of interpreting the API call. And, you know,
what I'm doing is I'm just pulling in the station ID and the number of bikes available.
These are really sort of the most important fields to me. This is going to be my target
when I'm doing my machine learning. And then I'm going to write this to my database. That's
getting written to my database. And that's actually scheduled to happen on RStudio Connect
every 20 minutes. So that's great. Taken care of. The next piece, though, and this is what
I'm going to pin. So this data frame, this data frame, this is the station information.
So it's those IDs, those station IDs, which are just numeric. But I have the names here,
which is what I'm putting, you know, pop up there in the app. I'm putting up the latitude
and longitude, which I'm going to use both to put them on the map and also as a feature
in my machine learning model, as well as the capacity of the stations, which is also an
important feature of my machine learning model. And this is a perfect candidate for a pin.
It's small. It's less than 600 rows. I reuse it several different times across this piece
of content. And I always want the most current version. On my map, I don't want to be showing
stations that don't exist or that have moved or anything like that. And so this is what
I'm going to be pinning in my code. Similarly, then when I go on to build my XGBoost
model, again, I'm going to skip a lot through some code here. But you can see that I'm
pulling in another pin here. This is my modeling parameters, actually, that I'm writing elsewhere.
But what I really want to show is down here, I'm training my model with parsnip XGB train.
And then what I'm saving here is this list object, right? This is like this could be
a formal S3 object. It's not. It's just a list. But I have my model. I'm saving some
metadata with it as well, the training date, the splitting date between my testing and
training set, and the recipe that I'm using from the recipes package to actually make
my training data. And then I'm pinning that here on to RStudio Connect. And this is super
useful, right? Now I have a really good way to know what I've done. And then last, my
plumber API that's serving those predictions, I've got my model. I'm reading it in here.
And then all this code basically is just sort of interpreting the input from the API and
making sure it's ready to be fed into the model. And then down here, right, I'm running
that predict command on that model that's from the pin. And this is, you know, purring
away on RStudio Connect. And so, you know, I can come here to the Swagger interface and
get back, you know, these are the predictions for station 75. I don't know what station
that is. But that's why I have the other one, the other pin with the station names.
So that's how pins sort of fit into this app. So now I've got a solution for this, right?
For my analysis data, I can do it in a database or in a pin. For my model, I can do it in
a pin. One thing I do want to say is, like, these are just slots. And you can put whatever
you want into these slots. So, for example, you know, if you're using some model in Python
or some import method in Python, you can totally do that and use reticulate to go back and
forth between R and Python super easily. If what you're serving isn't a model, if it's,
you know, plots or just some kind of counting, right, the same principle totally works. And
when you're sharing, right, if what you've got is an R markdown document that you want
to render and email out or something like that, again, think of these as slots. You
know, my version happened to be R markdown, R markdown plumber shiny app, but yours can
be whatever you want. Okay. So pins has really helped me a lot make
this content more accessible, more reproducible. But I haven't really addressed security at
all. And that's a really important piece here. The security of my app. And so, of course,
I went back to Yoda. And, you know, in Return of the Jedi, as Yoda is dying, fading away
after 800 years of training Jedi knights, witnessing the downfall. Sorry, I really like
Star Wars. He gives this one final piece of advice to Luke, and he says, deploy to the
right server and secure your data will be. Which, you know, I think is very prescient
of him. And so, you know, you can do this in an open source way if that's what you're
more comfortable doing for this important training step. Put it on a server, any server
that has R works. You can use a cron job if you want to schedule it. For your analysis
data in your model, if you have a database for the database stuff or a pins board, I
showed there are a whole bunch of options, right? For serving the model, any server with
R, again, can work. You do have some things you have to be delicate with here around how
auth works, right? So you can do that with networking rules, you can put a proxy in front
of it, you can, like, route it through a lambda gateway to take care of API keys. You have
lots of options, but you're going to want to do something to secure this API. And then
for sharing, you have a lot of options. If it's an R markdown document, either a website
or a rendered document, Netlify is a great choice. Shiny server open source is available
to you, and shinyapps.io is also an option, which is not open source, but is relatively
affordable. So, you know, that can be a really good option here if you're doing a private
thing or something that's for your own use. Of course, we see a lot of organizations that
sort of struggle with pieces of this. Either they don't want to manage this many sort of
separate pieces, their IT organizations don't want to manage stuff in R. We see that a lot.
That's totally fine. And so, of course, sort of easy mode here is our professional product,
RStudio Connect, and that takes care of a lot of these pieces for you, right? It can
deal with the API keys, it can deal with scheduling the R markdown documents, it can deal with
securing the plumber APIs, it can deal with accessibility controls and that kind of stuff,
and you can put pins on RStudio Connect. So this can be a really useful way to do all
of this. So, big takeaways. When you are thinking about deploying content, the top three things
to really optimize for are accessibility, reproducibility, and security, right? If you're
hitting these three keys, you're probably increasing value with what you're doing as
opposed to just adding sophistication. While you're doing that, R markdown, shiny, plumber,
and pins are good friends of yours. And, of course, may the force be with you. Thanks,
everybody.
So, I failed to mention at the top of things here, but if you have questions, we're going
to continue using Slido as we did in the keynote. So we're in Grand Ballroom B, so if you have
a question, go to the same Slido page, select Grand Ballroom B, and you can enter your questions
there or vote on questions that are already asked there. So I'm going to ask Alex some
questions here since we have a couple minutes. Maybe this was covered in the last half of
your presentation, but do you want to readdress how pins is different from a well-organized
shared file system with correct ACLs?
Yeah, that's a great question. To be honest, under the hood, it's not that different, right?
You have the same kind of control and access controls. The main difference is that it's
a very R-centric answer, and so you can, from within R, address those objects without having
to go through the hassle of figuring out how your shared file system works, finding
things and that sort of thing. So from an IT perspective, maybe not that different,
but from the perspective of an R developer, it's a very different development experience.
It's much more straightforward.
Yeah. This next one we get a lot, so I'm happy to ask it here. What's the benefit of using
a plumber API for saving the object to S3 and then calling it with a Shiny app?
Oh, that's a great question. I love that question. There are a couple benefits. One
is that you can, the biggest benefit to me, and this happens in several different ways,
is that it decouples the logic of serving the model from the logic of displaying whatever
you're displaying or doing something else with it. So you decouple those things, and
that makes your life easier. It makes your life easier in a couple ways. One of them
is purely from a code perspective. It makes it easier to write the code because you write
your plumber API to serve the model, you write your Shiny app or whatever it is to consume
the model, and you get to sort of separate those concerns, which is really nice. The
other piece from a performance perspective, you can test those two things independently.
You can test the plumber API with, say, the load test package, which I think some people
might be talking about next. And then you can test the Shiny app separately. You can
decouple both the coding and the performance issues between the API and the app, which
is great. Excellent. Okay. Next, is there a limit to the amount of data you should be
using with pins? It depends on which board you're using. Some of those boards do have
limits to how much you can save. You know, my suggestion would be that if you're saving
more than a gigabyte's worth of data, there's probably a better solution for what you're
doing. And that's totally a rule of thumb, not a real thing. But just in general, if
you're finding yourself doing more than that, you're probably saving an object that's bigger
than pins really is designed for. One thing that can be helpful is if you're saving model
objects, often the model objects package up a lot of stuff with it that you don't necessarily
want, like the training data. And that could make your model really big and sort of inflate
the size. There is a package called butcher, like, you know, a person who makes meat cuts,
that you can use to sort of chop out some of the stuff in your model object you don't
want and just save, like, actually the model. So if you're saving models, that can be a
useful thing to do.
Cool. Do one more here. I like this one as well. Is there a reason your import and model
training code is in R Markdown files instead of plain R scripts?
Yes, that's a great question. I love it when things that I put in the presentation and
then took out because I didn't have time come back in questions. Yeah, so I really love
R Markdown for two main reasons. One is that it encourages literate programming that is
interspersing code and prose, right? Because you have just, like, a place to write prose.
It doesn't even have to be comments. You just write it, and it's great. The other reason
that you have a record of what you did. So when you come back later and something has
gone awry with your model, you have output there with the code of what actually happened,
unlike if it's just an R script and then whatever happened was totally ephemeral and it's gone
forever.
Well, everyone, please join me in thanking Alex again.
Thanks, everybody.